in the elevator
nice to meet you I know I'm Dean nice to
meet you good to see you thanks for
coming yeah yeah you get you always have
a lot of cameras around you know I'm the
me I'm the one who's not used to it
have a seat thanks for coming to first
welcome I think it's great to have you
here the things I want to talk to you
about I want to talk to you a little bit
about race um your music some too
I thought the song talking to OJ it was
particularly powerful mm-hmm I took the
message as you can be rich you can be
poor you're still black who are you
speaking to who did you want to listen
to that and be moved by it
it's a nuanced song you know it's like
um I'm specifically speaking to us and
about who we are and how do you maintain
a sense of self while pushing it forward
and holding us to have a responsibility
for our actions because in America it is
what it is
and there's a solution for us if we had
a power base together but we have much
different conversation then me having a
conversation by myself trying to change
America by myself if I come with 40
million people there's a different
conversation
right it's just how it works I can
affect change and get in whomever in
office because this many people we're
all on the same page right right so as a
conversation insight I'm not rich I'm OJ
for us to get in that space and then
disconnect from the culture right that's
how it starts this is what happens and
then you know what happened you're on
your own and you see how that turned out
okay that's what I did that's the line
yeah you're the pregnant pause
it's like okay was it a reminder to that
the thing Oh Jay forgot maybe that as
rich as he was as as entitled as his
life was he was reminded very forcefully
when he became a subject of a racial
debate that he was also a black man
whether he accepted that or not that's
also that mess yes absolutely and for us
like I'm saying to speak to that point
is don't forget that because that's
really not to go the goal is not to be
successful and famous that's not the
goal the goal is if you have a specific
card giving ability is to live your life
out through that right one and two we
have a responsibility to push the
conversation forward until we're all
equal till we're all equal in this place
because until everyone's free no one's
free and that's just that's just the
fact when you are as amazingly
successful as you are your kids will
live in a very different world from the
world you grew up in how do you go about
making sure that they understand the
world you grew up in there's a digit
delicate balance to that right because
you have to educate your children on the
world as it exists today and how it got
to that space but my child doesn't need
the same tools that I needed growing up
I needed certain tools to survive my
area and my child has new big growing up
in a different environment but also they
have to know their history and have a
sense of of what it took to get to this
place and have compassion for others
right the most important thing I think
out of all this is to teach compassion
and to identify where everyone struggle
and to know these people make these
sacrifices first to be where we are and
to push that forward for us I believe
that's the most important thing to
showing them because they don't have to
know things that I know growing up like
being tough play
do you worry at all that as much as you
will teach them history and as much as
you yourself is seen as an important
figure among black people in America
that there's something they'll be
missing or do you think that's silly in
fact that there have so many advantages
that that's like of a way of exactly
like they it's they'll be who they are
right and it's just certain tools that
you would hope for your child to have
you know like again fairness and
compassion and like empathy and a loving
heart and those things translate in any
environment those are the main base
things that you want well for me I would
want my child to have you know to treat
people as they are no matter who they
are no matter where they sit in the
world not to like be super nice to
someone we're at it's a high position or
mean to someone who they deemed to be
below them I can't buy you love I can't
show it to you I can show you affection
and I can you know I can express love
but I can't put it in your hand right I
can't put compassion in your hand
I can't show you that right so the most
beautiful things are things that are
invisible that's would be important
things lie for me as a black man of a
certain age when I was a kid oh gee
Simpson was God I'm 61 so I was a little
kid when he was do you expect black
people and white people and young people
and old people to hear different things
in your music I'm sure I heard some
things in that song that you may not
even have thought of cuz I'm a different
generation what do you want a young
white kid to hear in that song that
maybe a young black kid would not hear
that's a great question um I think when
you make music you want people to hear
it and hear different things and then
you want it to start a dialogue because
that's how we get to understanding
excuse me oh you felt that way about it
this is actually what I meant because
this happened and these things happen
and led to me saying this specific thing
how did you react when when the end of
that
in that song where you refer to to Jews
and wealth some people got upset how did
you feel about that I felt it was really
hypocritical only because I mean it's
obvious the song is like you want to be
rich do what people who got rich done of
course it's a general statement right
it's obviously a general statement like
the video attached to it was a general
statement and if you didn't have a
problem with the general statement I
made about black people and people even
watermelon and things like that that was
fine and that line about wealth bothers
you then that's very hypocritical and
you know that's something within
yourself because basically I was saying
you know Michael Jordan LeBron James is
a great basketball player he trains an
offseason if you want to be great
training offseason like him that's
basically the statement big things you
can't miss the context of the song you
have to be like five years old at
something some people think that the
election of Donald Trump has revived the
debate of race in America yeah some
people think that in fact there's always
an racism in Americans that it hasn't
changed and that the debate isn't any
different just people are paying
attention to it yeah there was a great
Kanye West lining on his song he said uh
racism still alive they just be
concealing it yeah yeah take a step back
I think when Donald sterling got kicked
out of the NBA I thought it was a
misstep because when you kick someone
out of course he's done wrong right will
you also send everyone else back in
hiding hmm we will talk like that mm-hmm
I talk like that steel with that you
know one just like leave him alone I
don't have that solution there should
have been some sort of penalties we
could have lost some draft picks but
getting rid of him just made everyone
else go back into hiding now we can't
have the dialogue the great thing about
Donald Trump being president is now
we're forced to have the dialogue and
now we have in the conversation on the
large scale each I could provide it the
platform for us to have the conversation
you think that's better that we should
be
conversation absolutely that's that's
that's why there's this happening do you
think the debate over race in America is
happening in a healthy way
well the ideal way is to have a
president that says I'm open to dialogue
in fixedness that's ideal but it's still
happening in a good way because you
can't have a solution until you start
dealing with the problem what you reveal
you heal all right if I have like a
tumor and I don't I know it doesn't mean
it goes away I have to diagnose it first
no matter how it happens if I get hit
with a football and like oh I feel
something there and then I go to the
doctor it still happen right you know
I'm saying so however it happens and we
just get hit with a lot of football I
should use it knowledge either that goes
next to the NFL if you are owner you
would sign Colin Kaepernick right yeah I
dedicated the story Oh Jay to a man of
medals concert have you met him no we
just had dialogue over there that's the
phone we told you we could get together
do you have any doubt that if this not
had happened he would be signed by -
yeah yeah of course do you think
basketball is more politically active
than football players yeah and why why
is I think first of all it's smaller
numbers there's 12 people on the team in
football you have 53 people so it's
harder to get 53 people who thinking the
same thing it's easier to have a
conversation to get 12 people on the
same page for one - they have a great
Commissioner it's really open and you
know supports them and you feel that you
feel like you know when you have someone
behind you that really believe in what's
right it motivates you to do the right
thing I think those two factors show why
we have much further along yeah other
incidents even at this stage in your
life so you're famous you you rich you
own stuff where you run into racism
that's evident to you that's easy to
recognize at this stage of your life
yeah yes yeah but it mostly comes when
you try to challenge the status
well I'm being quiet and entertaining
everyone's cool man it's great you don't
feel racism when you try to challenge
the club it's like right oh no we should
have a seat at to use the Solange album
title you should have a seat at this
table and then it gets into a space
where it's like wait you guys are mad at
me about the same thing you guys are
doing it's just it gets into a weird
space are you in meetings now in your
business life mm-hmm where you're the
only black man in the room well when I
was doing the Nets I was definitely the
only black guy what was that like
described that was it was um it's
strange but at the same time I think
that I think that in that room
my celebrity allowed me a voice that
probably would have been awkward for
someone in my position being the only
black person in the room to break
through this album sounds to me like a
therapy session it's yeah II sense have
you been in therapy yeah yeah first off
how does jay-z find a therapist not in
the phone book right no great friends of
mine you know friends of mine who've
been through a lot and you know come out
and the other side is like whole
individuals what was that like being in
therapy uh were you what did you talk
about that you had never acknowledged to
yourself or talk I grew so much from an
experience I think the most important
thing I got is that everything is
connected every emotion is connected and
it comes from from somewhere and just
being aware of it being aware of it in
everyday life puts you at it's such a
you're such an advantage you know you
realize that you know someone's racist
toward you now even about you it ain't
about you it's about their upbringing
and what happened to them and how they
led them to this point you know most
bullies bully just happy mm-hmm oh you
got bullied kids so you're trying to
bully me I understand right and once I
understand that instead of reacting to
that with anger I can provide a softer
landing
and maybe um and did you okay I was just
saying I was a lot of fights in our
neighborhood that started with she
looking at are you looking at me you
looking at me and then you realize oh
you oh you think I see you you're in the
space where you're hurting and you think
I see you so you don't want me to look
at you and you don't want me to see you
in such a boner you don't want me to see
your pain you know so you put on this
shell of this tough person that's really
willing to fight me and possibly kill me
because I looked at you you know I'm
saying like so knowing that an
understanding that changes life
completely
was that a moment that came from therapy
yes just realizing that oh my goodness
these young men coming from me stay just
in pain you got to survive
so you're going to survive a model and
when you're going to survive what
happened shut down right you shut down
all the motions right so even with women
you've got shut down emotionally so you
can't connect and then that all the
things happen from their infidelity
connector lyrics I can't connect because
of the way you feel about yourself you
mean yes in my case like it was deep
right
you've taught you bared your soul so
much not only in this album and I mean
you can sort of see the evolution of a
person in your music part of me would
think oh my god I got to talk about my
marriage I'm gonna talk about my mother
I gotta talk about my other ancestors
part of me would think that would make
me nuts does it make you not so do you
feel like the heart of your art and
storytelling is is to tell the story of
your life that's who I am
and I'm done there from the beginning of
my career to things you know one no one
knew the characters so it wasn't as
impactful you know um and ii wasn't
coming from a place that was as evolved
and it's very difficult you know it's
hard it's hard to hear songs back it's
hard to perform songs but um
I feel is the most important work that
I've done and I'm very proud of it and
the effect that it's having on people
and even like the studio sessions you
know we were having for our
conversations after playing one song I
learned so much about people that was
around me just my friends I learned
things about them that I didn't know
they're in 20-year relationship just
from this one song so I know we had that
sort of impact beyond myself mm-hmm he's
my responsibility as an artist to to go
to these places did your wife's own
confessional album which came out first
make it so that you had to be even extra
confessional in other words it would
have been hard after her album which
talk frankly about yeah yeah you guys to
like have an album to come out that
would about frivolous yeah it actually
started out we were working on material
together and in and it became lemonade
yeah you know she did she went off and
did her her thing and it was like he
just felt like oh she should go first
and she should share her heart her
troops with the world so it wasn't based
on I have to say something because this
hour wasn't even like they're just
really honest she probably couldn't have
gotten away with okay you do the album
wife that talks about our pain I'm gonna
go do an album that talks about you know
my love you never know I think it turned
out for the best I think I think but you
just never know because people like to
be entertained again back to our
president you know I'm saying like you
would think man after the composed
manner at which Obama stood at that
podium the dignity he brought to that
place that this couldn't exist but it
does do many disappointments in Obama
there are people who say the
expectations of him as the first black
president was so great he was supposed
to get rid of racism fix everything yeah
is that unfair do you think the answer
did he live up to all of your
expectations yes because all you could
do is the best he can do it's not a
superhero and it's unfair to place
unfulfilled bill expectations on this
man just because of his color you're
actually doing the opposite it's it's
like what do you think is gonna happen
she's dead for eight years and he has to
undo what 43 presidents have done in
eight years it's not fair what do you
think of the state of I'm not gonna save
just black leadership leadership period
on the things you care about in the
country who do you like look at and say
this man or woman I think except for the
things I care about it's gonna be funny
I find it funny but my my leadership I
like Dave Chappelle's because he tells
it in humor so you can deal with it but
it's always a nice chunk of truth in it
is there a part of you because you have
a certain amount of money that gets a
little more conservative or does having
money not change your politics no I know
cuz because I'm not I believe in people
you know I want what's best for people I
love people you know so I don't I don't
have that sort of thing like I want to
vote Republican just to save more money
right that's not the endgame it's not
about who got more money and who got
more houses yes
you know you've earned it by what you
want right you know but don't forget
what's important without people in this
being Richard be very boring person one
person on the planet it's like yeah but
then what do you do when I heard this
latest album and then I thought about
the earlier albums one theme just sort
of reaching the promised land
you know you've acquired influence and
not just money but you have your life is
good and then when you listen to the
newest album you thinking he must have
been in a lot of pain when life was good
absolutely yeah I did this to a song
called song cry mm-hmm
the idea of the hook never seen it
coming down my eyes but I gotta make the
song cry tells you right there what I
was I was hiding the strongest thing a
man can do is cry to expose your
feelings to be vulnerable in front of
the world
that's real strength mm-hmm you know you
feel like you got to be this God a
person that's not real its fake I mean
you were unhappy during that period and
didn't have a handle on it or or what
well you compartmentalize right so you
can be you can be inside your body and
be happy but at the core of it something
else is going on right as a you know
parent I thought one of the most painful
scene or a line or whatever and the
album was when you are talking about
having almost lost your marriage and you
talk about what it would have been like
to watch another man play football with
your kid I thought that is like given
that you have talked so much about your
life in your music or there are things
that you put a wall around I'm not gonna
talk about that you've talked about the
pain of growing up where you grew up how
you grew up you know your father leaving
early the pain of your marriage being in
therapy other things you say I'm not
going there
yeah and it mostly involves other people
because when other people are involved
yet they're also you may be ready to
expose these things into certain parts
of you know it's also other people truth
as well a perfect example is my mom yeah
I was gonna and Wendy I didn't have
permission to do that song first so just
like we had a beautiful conversation
when did you realize your mother was gay
uh
really early on boom Lake is a little
kid not no no it makes this a call
teenage years she's realized it and
talked to her about it
what was that we never spoke about it we
it just exists it was there everyone
knew God but we never spoke about it
until like recently now we start having
these beautiful conversations and just
really like getting to know each other
we're always good friends but now we're
like really great friends you know
and we were just talking his friends and
she was sharing back she was in love and
I guess this years of like feeling for
her and feeling like she's free she
could be herself she doesn't have to
hide for our kids or in being feeling
she's embarrassing our kids there's a
much different time then don't think
about yeah of course you know me
she just live a full life a whole life
and be her will this get harder over
time like you know as a young man and
your music was the way a lot of young
rappers are it's right you know the
violent life mm-hmm
you know if that's chapter one of the
autobiography chapter two of the Autobot
I'm over simplifying this is like yeah
yeah now I'm really rich have a lot of
stuff let me tell you how cool that is
and then chapter 3 of the autobiography
is oh my god I'm like run myself into
the ground with me is oh my goodness
oh the most beautiful things are not
these objects the most beautiful things
are inside the most beautiful things are
the friendships I have I've really like
gold and friendships that you know most
people don't have you can have all the
watches and paintings and world you
don't have a friend like its friends
like I had the friendships I've acquired
and the compassion and the person I've
become like that's just what this
chapters you know in a conversation with
my mom those are the real enriching
experiences will you have the same
adventures in your life we have the same
stuff to write about or maybe you don't
know I think that rap in particular is a
young man's sport that I'll move out of
that white-hot space but rapid is about
the gift of discovery to be the cool
person in school you had the Noli newest
music the newest dance move had the
newest clothing on so rap is based on
that what's new what do you I know you
know jay-z is good but do you know this
song right here too only for people who
heard it right you know saying then they
bring that person into the masses know
pop culture and then you have a window
before saying that you are the one is no
longer cool and then you
to move past that and you have to find a
way to exist the white-hot space is when
it's fresh and new and it's like this is
the hottest song ever right
I mean I'll push the window like usually
not so I stood in that window a really
long time ceiling but still no I don't
think people are looking to me it's like
the thing to do you feel like I'm okay
with that because I've moved on
no you don't want because out at the end
of day we don't find out it's not about
the white-hot space but it's about
finding the truth mm-hmm
that white-hot space people think is the
biggest thing but it's really small it's
almost like a trend mm-hmm will you
rather be a trend or you rather be Ralph
Lauren right you know I mean like you
rather be a trend or you rather be
forever I'm the person that looked at
the Mona Lisa you're like man that's
gonna be cool in a cup in 40 years right
right
I play forever right I play forever and
B and so my whole thing is identified
with the truth not to be the youngest
hottest new trendy thing one of the
things you rap about also is the pain
you cost the people you sold drugs to
have you ever had conversations with
people like that you caused pain to as a
young man and don't know how I have it
no what would you say to that or is that
impossible to do at this point
oh me nothing is impossible mm-hmm right
um so no I don't think is impossible I
guess that conversation would definitely
take ownership for my part in and you
know the part I played in occupying that
space because knowing what I know now
you know you can't sacrifice others for
your life you know that's there's a
karmic debt that has to be paid had I
had the level of consciousness then that
I had now things would have turned out
differently and just knowing that I
definitely want everyone to know that
two black artists
have a different obligation than white
artists do you feel you have a different
kind of obligation to the people who
listen to you then if you were a white
musician yeah because I have obligation
going back to the story oj is to further
conversation of an entire race of people
not me all of us but specifically me
since the action the question is to open
up dialogue it's okay to think it's okay
to be smart you know there's a time
where people was like you're talking
white that's like what is that even me
yeah I know I know words intelligence is
not attribute to color and I'm sure
you've heard it growing up many times
we're speaking white yeah speaking like
I know words yeah and it's okay it's
fine you know so I have an obligation to
further the conversation in all ways you
know I was statue in America our
emotional maturity and so on and so
forth it's humbling at the same time
he's like you know what you've been
charged with in life right and I think
believed since the beginning the time
the poet's has been charged with that
like it was the poet's that's explaining
the emotions and and making these songs
that people like oh that's what I feel
right other black artists and I won't
ask you to name him unless you want to
who you think don't live up to that
obligation to start a conversation about
race do you think they're people you
want man
and for 100 J right we because that's
that's that's the one that we can all
identify but yes there are those who
don't uphold their mantle and we know
how that story plays out do you would
you if you could talk to Jay Simpson
what would you say to him if you could
talk to him I don't know I'll probably
say me I'm sorry to so much happen to
you man
you know people act out in this way
based on their life experiences and and
let you know I'm sure he's been through
a lot of trauma in his life and you know
I think our death data start the
conversation like did you watch the
documentary by him but I watched
everyone dead yeah no I did too here's
like eight of them all at the same time
you could read the story of OJ two ways
you could say somebody should remind it
or J he was black
I could read that as a negative message
or a positive message the positive
message being you're black and you
should be more proud of it the negative
message is who are you kidding
you can't escape this by joining a
private Country Club and playing golf
right which message feels the right like
the way both they both do or dual
messages at the same time it's like be
proud of who you are and and realize
that we we're gonna get further together
right don't check out you can't just you
know turn your back on the place you
come from you come from the community
your job is to uplift it now or we know
how it turns out right once you stop
being Tiger Woods and you going on you
would just say to Tiger Woods
do you know Tiger Woods no no no no I'm
done how would you classify Tiger Woods
and that disgust same sort of thing
that's I'm saying like you know when
Tiger was afforded the privilege of you
know he playing golf you know you were
protected but a minute that you're not
providing for the thing it's like now
your license is on TV and it's like
you're black mm-hmm mm-hmm
so now I gotta ask Mike one gossipy
question talk about Kanye West and your
relationship with him which you alluded
to a little bit album was the last time
you talked to him I hate calling it out
the day just tell him back he's my
brother I love Kanye I do
it's complicated relationship with us
well is it complicated it because you
know Kanye came into this business on my
label so I've always been like his big
brother
and we're both entertainers it's always
been like a little underlying
competition there with your big brother
and we both love and respect each
other's art too so it's like a
we both everyone wants to be the
greatest in the world you know I'm
saying and then it's like a lot of other
factors that play in it
but it's gonna always be good
you know even if the ocean now right hmm
is their attention still yeah yeah yeah
but that happens in the long
relationship you know hopefully when
we're 89 we look at this six months or
whatever time and we laugh at that you
know I'm saying is gonna be
complications in the relationship that
we have to get through and the only way
to get through that is we sit down and
have a dialogue and say these are the
things that I'm uncomfortable with these
are the things that unacceptable to me
this is what I feel I'm sure he feels
that I've done things to him as well you
know I'm saying these are I'm not a
perfect human being by no stretch you
know is he as evolved as you you sound
like a no he's I think he started out in
a more compassionate position than me
you know I'm saying I don't know if he's
had the level of I mean I had survived
by my instincts I'm here because I'm a
different grew up a different way and I
got out of that right
my first out came out when was 26 so I
was already a different artist right you
know a lot of people I'm come out they
17 18 so their subject matter is that of
a 17 or 18 year old unless you're knives
and you like well read and like I think
his mom was a teacher so I'm like he was
way more advanced but the album that he
wrote so I just grew up a different way
but he's a very compassionate person and
a lot of times you get in trouble trying
to help others you know so I can
identify with it it's just that there's
certain things that happen now I'm just
not really acceptable attorney and we
just need to speak about it and it's
just like however the relationship
evolves but there's a genuine we love
that I'm trying to picture the scene
when you and your wife both talk about
making these very confessional open
albums was it difficult to say I'm gonna
talk about the problems in our marriage
I'm gonna talk about how we almost lost
things and for her to say I'm gonna talk
about my pain and anger at you what were
those conversations like again it didn't
it didn't happen in that way it happened
we we were using out
with our all right almost like a therapy
session and we started making music
together and then the music she were
making at that time was further along so
her album came out as opposed to the
joint album man that we were working on
we still have a lot of that music and
this is what it became there was never a
point where it was like I'm making this
album I was there right that was right
there the entire time and what was her
reaction to your work and what was your
reaction to hers they must have cause I
think they were both for each of you
right of course then it both very very
uncomfortable but sitting in that the
best the best place and uh you know
hurricane is like in the middle of it
yeah we were sitting in the AIA that had
hurricane uh maybe not use hurricane
because so many people being affected
right now but the best place is right in
the middle of the pain right and that's
where we were sitting and it was
uncomfortable and it's a lot of
conversations you know and really proud
of the music she made and she was really
proud of the the art I release and you
know at the end of the day we really
have a healthy respect for one another's
crap I think she's amazing you know most
people walk away and like divorce rate
is like fifty percent of something
because most people can't see themself
the hardest thing is seeing pain on
someone's face that you caused and
didn't have to deal with yourself yeah
so you know most people don't want to do
that yeah you don't want to look inside
yourself and so you walk away
you